## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Ever since high-throughput techniques became a staple in science laboratories, the generation of computational algorithms and scientific software boomed.
However, it has been noted that scientific software, and specifically bioinformatics software, often lacks the quality standards of software development. The consequence of this is code that can be hard to test (or independently verify), reuse, and maintain.
We believe the root of inefficiency in implementing the best software development practices in the academic settings is the individualistic approach, which has traditionally been the norm for recognition of scientific achievements and by extension for software development.
In most software-heavy endeavours, software development is a collective effort.
The literature suggests that team work directly impacts code quality through knowledge sharing, collective software development, and established coding standards.
In our computational biology research groups, we explored ways to sustainably involve all group members in learning, sharing, and discussing software, while maintaining the personal ownership of research projects and related software products.
We found that through weekly meetings, within a year, regular members improved their coding skills, became more efficient bioinformaticians, and obtained a detailed knowledge about the work of their peers.
Through within-group knowledge transfer, each member obtained knowledge about advanced concepts without investing significant amount of time.
We can now quickly identify and access the expertise of each other, and we established standards to which new members are also required to comply.
We advocate for improvement of software development culture within bioinformatics through local collective effort in computational biology groups or institutes with 3 or more bioinformaticians.
Our three pillars of improving coding culture are: 1 - software quality seminars, 2 - code reviews, and 3 - resource sharing.

<!-- 
Some comments:
- Some of these sentences were rather strong. I have tried to soften them a bit using e.g. the word "often"
- At various places in the manuscript, I would reorder the sentences a bit. E.g. "Software development is a collective effort in most software-heavy endeavours." -> "In most software-heavy endeavours, ...". It makes for an easier read
-->
