## Coding in team ##

Beyond the brief mention of getting support or coding in a team in guidelines for bioinformaticians, specialized literature exists that examines how to effectively organize coding activities in a team.
Programming as a collective practice is a key notion in software engineering.
A central theme in this literature is maximizing team cohesion while minimizing code coupling [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
Authors argue that the viability of a software project along it successive development phases is largely determined by the adoption of sound software design enforcing modularity and extensibility, coupled with team management practices centred around communication and collective governance [@ISBN:0932633420].

In general, we understand management as the set of tasks ensuring the viability of a software project.
These tasks revolve around planning, monitoring resources, and tracking progression [@{https://www.wrike.com/project-management-guide/faq/what-is-software-project-management/}].
Typically, the oversight of these functions would be taken up by a single individual referred to as the “manager” of a project, where manager is a role rather than a title of a particular person.
In the particular context of computational projects in academia, a strict division of labour is rarely found in regard to the management of software projects.
Furthermore, some tasks, such as risk, budget and time management, and maintenance are discussed at the conception of the project (e.g. during grant application) and thus decoupled from the actual software development phase.
The remaining management tasks would often be deliberated by the developer(s), eventually, and often implicitly, reaching a consensus on the desired way forward and acted upon.

This sort of self-management, at times collective, echoes some prescriptions of the SCRUM method [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}] and more broadly the agile manifesto [@{https://agilemanifesto.org/}].
This proposition, advocating for more autonomy and responsivity, was a reaction to the typical blueprint-like management for engineering projects which proved ineffective in addressing the emerging challenges of large software projects [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
Current bioinformatics projects face similar challenges which is why agile practices are part of guidelines for scientific software developers (Table @tbl:sq-recommendations).
As agile is the only recommendation about team management present in these guidelines, we discuss it here in detail.

While agile advocates for more team communication, a focus on outcomes and quick feedback cycles with stakeholders, one outstanding aim is the aspiration for more autonomy in organizing the work of software developers.
In the particular context of large computational project, agile opened the opportunity for collective governance and a move away from a project structure with a division of labour coupling one developer to a particular task or aspect indefinitely.
Incentivizing a collective ownership and governance of the codebase as a whole, promotes the adoption of software engineering best practices among developers contributing to a software project [@doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2009.11.004].
Indeed, by aspiring to make any developer within the team interchangeable across the various ongoing tasks, we create the need for robust testing, comprehensive documentation and coherence across the difference parts of the project [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
Furthermore, by exposing every developer to a variety of tasks over the course of the project development, we strengthen the knowledge and skill base of the team as a whole, as well as create a better mutual awareness of team member expertise.
This mutual awareness is known as transactive memory system, and has been linked to increased team performance [@doi:10.1177/1046496420967764].
Taken together these merits further improve the team's capacity to overcome technical challenges that will arise over the course of the development process.

Reaping the benefits from agile-like practices requires the effective adoption of a variety of methods.
This process depends heavily on creating the adequate circumstances for the team to need to incorporate elements of agile in their regular work practice.
Practices and methods aligned with agile prescriptions include stand-up meetings, task allocations, pair-programming, or code reviews.
Note, that many of these practices do not require the presence of the manager, but assumes a collegial work culture and standardized procedures.
At their core, these practices incentivize continuous communication and collective decision-making among developers.
This constitutes an additional overhead in terms of time and resources needed when developing, but this is offset by the aforementioned benefits in terms of coding practice, software resilience and improved team capabilities.

The Agile Manifesto was written against "bureaucracy, infantilization, and sense of futility" [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}], which would in fact be a more stringent approach than current practices in academic software development.
For example, it would include writing down requirements in form of user stories, plan a minimal viable product, and divide the project into tasks.
This is important, because most literature pictures agile as management style free from traditional management.
The agile manifesto assumes that software engineering professionals seek to find the best approaches, and are well-equipped to make good decisions on their own - when faced with shifting requirements and complex code base [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
As noted in previous sections, current scientific software developer education does not necessarily cover these elements [@doi:10.1109/CSEET.2009.44].

Let us not forget that academia comes from a different place than where agile was developed.
We do not believe that all the software engineering guidelines employed in the industry are necessarily relevant to the production of scientific software.
The circumstances differ significantly, mainly due to how the outcomes of research projects (papers, tools, protocoles, etc) need to be credited to paricular individual researchers for their career progression.
Regardless of the optimality of this situation, personal projects remain the norm, and it would be futile to expect another group member to achieve an equal level of familiarity with one's project.
However, this should not prevent interactions between the people in the group, as it is through these interactions that rules are enforced and quality increased.

In our research groups, we have practically implemented the environment in which we, as a group, learn about and implement software quality practices that have been discussed in literature.
We want to share this experience and propose how simple additions, such as weekly code review sessions or seminars, can lead to improved quality collective or personal software.
