## Conclusions and future perspectives ##

Software engineering emerged and has been developing to address issues naturally arising from poorly planned software development, such as project failures, delays, incorrect functionality or defects [@doi:10.1145/3084225], none of which is unknown to the scientific community.
Indeed, the crisis of scientific software in general is widely discussed [@doi:10.1038/d41586-023-00053-w; @doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01516-2].
It is only natural that the bioinformatics community learns from those more experienced, and focuses on solving problems that have been identified.
In this case, it is both the software engineering research community and the industry experts on software and team management.

In our computational biology groups, we introduced regular seminars to learn about software solutions, and code reviews that fit our specific needs and context.
Through these meetings, we learnt about and adopted various concepts that achieve a better quality software (**Supplementary Material**).
Furthermore, we have established coding standards within our groups, which ease within-group support and collaborative projects.
We note that the usage of these tools is not necessarily aligned with industry practices, due to the experimental nature of scientific software.
Nevertheless, as bioinformatics becomes a more and more software-heavy field, we believe a good direction is to collectively lower the barrier to adapting to new technologies.

For large software project which supports many researchers and contributes to novel findings, working in team and following standards is a necessity and not an option.
While this may not be necessary for smaller projects, we argue that following good software quality practices is still very beneficial.
If single-person projects survive the original developer, deposited on platforms like GitHub, they might be overly cryptic and poorly documented so that no other scientist can take over [@doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01901-x].
Over time a project might be taken over by another person, thus accidentally becoming a sort of team project with (by definition) insufficient communication.
Lack of standards and good practices thus undermine maturation, addition of new features, and general maintainability.

When discussing our approach, it is implied that team dynamic is important, especially for such bottom-up approaches.
The overall performance increases when team members are familiar with each other and build problem-solving routines together through cumulative experience [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
In a group the knowledge on who knows what speeds up the problem-solving [@doi:10.1177/1046496420967764]; time spent together, and social factors ease technical knowledge transfer [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
We therefore motivate group leaders of groups with even a small computational component to build an environment for their trainees to communicate and discuss software quality aspects.

We envision a future where scientific software for core applications is appreciated, reliable, and actively maintained.
All scientists would benefit from a strong backbone of software solutions, that would support quick and efficient prototyping, as well as maturation of working solutions.
The lack of funding for the maintenance of software, prevents achieving a level of software quality that would inspire confidence in the results [@doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.88].
Funding is typically provided for the development of novel software, and it can be hard to justify spending time on maintenance which provides no output in terms of articles.
Currently, as Alexander Szalay puts it "the funding stops when they [researchers] actually develop the software prototype" [@doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01901-x].
Researchers want to build on each other's findings, use published novel software as tools, but they might need to spend quite some time adopting or maintaining that software [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412; @doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110848; @doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.88].
The infrastructure would benefit from funding earmarked for maintenance, and from dedicating time to it in project proposals.
Fortunately in recent years, the lack of funding is being recognized and addressed by a few agencies, such as the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Essential Open Source Software for Science fund [@{https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/}].
Scientific community and funding agencies should welcome the efforts of maintaining original software and encourage its updates instead of the development of a replacement software that risks remaining unmaintained.

To summarize, today it is important for the scientific community to recognize the limitations of the software we are producing.
This includes acknowledging the flaws in the process of coding.
As a potential great improvement we propose organizing activities, such as software quality and code review seminars, that would involve the whole research group in each other's projects, therefore allowing the sharing of knowledge and feedback on the code practically.
We also advocate for sustainable funding for the maintenance of existing and newly developed scientific software.