## Conclusions and future perspectives ##
(<span style="background-color: yellow">From Ieva: I would call this conclusions and future perspectives and would keep the section sharp and short</span>)

Software engineering emerged and has been developing to address issues naturally arising from poorly planned software development, such as project failures, delays, incorrect functionality or defects [@doi:10.1145/3084225], none of which is unknown to the scientific community.
It is only natural that the bioinformatics community learns from those more experienced, solving problems that have been identified.
In this case, it is both the software engineering research community and the industry experts on software and team management.

In our computational biology groups, we introduced regular seminars to learn about software solutions, and code reviews that fits our specific needs and context.
Through these meetings, we learnt about and adopted various concepts that achieve a better quality software, with special focus on reliability, performance and extensibility.
Furthermore, we have established coding standards within our groups, which ease within-group support and collaborative projects.
We note that the usage of these tools is not necessarily aligned with industry practices, due to the experimental nature of scientific software.
Nevertheless, as bioinformatics becomes a more and more software-heavy field, we believe a good direction is to collectively lower the barrier to adapting to new technologies.

As an example, we used our experience from these sessions, during the update of the curation analysis software of the 2024 release of the JASPAR database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkad1059].
In this project, as well as in some of our own individual research projects, we adopted object-oriented programming style, introduced user stories when documenting the requirements and assumptions, relied on Jira to add features and report bugs, and we established continuous integration with git.
Beyond the technical solutions, we also assigned tasks and adopted code reviews for each pull request.
The reduced treshold of adopting new practices enabled us to follow a team-based software development practice in this project with little to no prior experience.

It is implied that team dynamic is important, especially for such bottom-up approaches.
Huckman et al. found that the overall performance increases when team members are familiar with each other and build problem-solving routines together through cumulative experience [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
Miriam Posner also points out that team management practices do not protect from a toxic environment [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
We therefore recommend to group leaders motivated in establishing coding standards within their groups to prioritize building a well functioning team.



The crisis of scientific software is fairly well known [@doi:10.1038/d41586-023-00053-w; @doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01516-2].
Without a shift in coding culture within bioinformatics, these concepts might remain unavailable to help bioinformatics professionals.
Therefore, we need to increase the awareness and applicability of the software quality standards.
Depending on the application of the scientific software, whether it is a tool or a data analysis pipeline, the authors may prioritize different quality attributes [@doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110848].
For example, in the world of big data, performance and efficiency gain importance.
Scientific software developer needs to prioritize the software quality attributes to make choices among the good practices [@doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110848].
Understandably, trying to implement all software quality practices can be daunting, especially while the main priority is to produce scientifically relevant results, and may actually discourage scientists to change their habits.
We propose that coding in a team environment could help to ease into good software quality practices.

How to decide when it is time to invest in a script?
Taschuk and Wilson [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412] suggest a cut-off where a script is being reused, shared with others or used to produce findings in a publication.
This definition would potentially include the majority of code written by bioinformaticians, but the time spent on improving the scripts should be weighed against the time required to deal with suboptimal code.
Overall, as good practices become routine, the required time investment will be reduced and the benefits will become more apparent.

There is a method called ad-hoc testing, which could be beneficial for scientists without test plans or documentation.
It is flexible, allows creativity and discovery of new requirements [@{https://www.browserstack.com/guide/adhoc-testing}].
However, it is not advised to be used on its own, as it is not robust and requires extensive know-how.

The lack of funding for the maintenance of software, particularly scientific software, prevents achieving a level of software quality that would inspire confidence in the results.
Funding is typically provided for the development of novel software, and it can be hard to justify spending time on maintenance which provides no output in terms of articles.
Currently, as Alexander Szalay puts it "The funding stops when they (researchers) actually develop the software prototype" [@doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01901-x].
This is a problem, because future researchers would want to build on each other's findings, use previous software as tools, and spend less time adopting or maintaining software [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412; @doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110848; @doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.8].
We believe the infrastructure would benefit from funding earmarked for maintenance, and from dedicating time to it in project proposals.

The next, almost natural, question related to better maintenance of scientific software in academia is funding.
It is notoriously hard to attract funding for existing scientific software, which contributes to the poor maintenance status of much of scientific software [@doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.88].
Fortunately in recent years, the lack of funding is being recognized and addressed by a few agencies, such as the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Essential Open Source Software for Science fund [@{https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/}].
These initiatives are great examples of how our views towards scientific software should be updated.
Scientific community and funding agencies should welcome the efforts of maintaining original software and encourage its updates instead of development of new software that risks remaining unmaintained.














## Optional section that might be put in discussion instead.
- Comparison to current academic coding
    - agile would be more stringent
    - agile would challenge the one project : one developer configuration
    - agile would highlight the impossibility to capitalise dividends of long-term building of knowlegebase and team chemistry
    - agile would point at the training gap

- Approaches and circumstances promoting the benefits of agile

- Cost-Benefit of adoption

Working in teams is not an option, but a must for large projects.
Although it is not necessary in smaller projects, the benefits are significant.
- over time a small project might be taken over by another person, thus accidentally becoming a sort of team project with (by definition) insufficient communication
- lack of standards and good practices undermine quality and maintainability
- ease of technical knowledge transfer (which requires time and social factors) [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}]
- knowledge on who knows what (transactive memory system) speeds up problem solving [@doi:10.1177/1046496420967764]

However, it is not trivial to assemble a well functioning team.
Authors found that the overall performance increases when team members are familiar with each other and build problem-solving routines together through cumulative experience [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
Miriam Posner also points out that team management practices do not protect from a toxic environment [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
