## Conclusions and future perspectives ##
(<span style="background-color: yellow">From Ieva: I would call this conclusions and future perspectives and would keep the section sharp and short</span>)

We implemented a form of code review that fits our specific needs and context.
We used our experience from these sessions, with special focus on team-based software development practices ensuring good code quality during in the update of the curation analysis software of the 2024 release of the JASPAR database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkad1059].
In this project, as well as in some of our own individual research projects, we introduced user stories when documenting the assumptions, current features and new ideas, and we relied on development tools such as Jira and git.
We note that the usage of these tools is not necessarily aligned with industry practices, due to the experimental nature of scientific software.
Nevertheless, as bioinformatics becomes a more and more software-heavy field, we believe a good direction is to collectively lower the barrier to adapting to new technologies.

How to decide when it is time to invest in a script?
Taschuk and Wilson [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412] suggest a cut-off where a script is being reused, shared with others or used to produce findings in a publication.

There is a method called ad-hoc testing, which could be beneficial for scientists without test plans or documentation.
It is flexible, allows creativity and discovery of new requirements [@{https://www.browserstack.com/guide/adhoc-testing}].
However, it is not advised to be used on its own, as it is not robust and requires extensive know-how.


(<span style="background-color: yellow">From Ieva: I would discuss a bit about lack of funding here. Or the importance of funding for software maintenance and the need to support already existing software</span>)













## Optional section that might be put in discussion instead.
- Comparison to current academic coding
    - agile would be more stringent
    - agile would challenge the one project : one developer configuration
    - agile would highlight the impossibility to capitalise dividends of long-term building of knowlegebase and team chemistry
    - agile would point at the training gap

- Approaches and circumstances promoting the benefits of agile


Let us not forget that academia comes from a different place than where agile was developed.
The Agile Manifesto was written against "bureaucracy, infantilization, and sense of futility" [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
The academic software development agile practices would in fact be a more stringent approach to software development than current practices.
For example it would include writing down requirements in form of user stories, plan a minimal viable product, plan an initial architecture, and dividing the project into tasks.
This is important, because most literature pictures agile as management style free from traditional management.
We should not forget that ad-hoc coding does not comply with agile, and we cannot use it as an excuse to continue our current practices.
The agile system assumes that software engineering professionals seek to find the best approaches, and are well equiped to make good decisions on their own - when faced with shifting requirements and complex code base [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
Additionally, the lack of top-to-bottom management, architects and system analysts in academic software development put even more responsibility on the individual developer.
However, as noted in previous sections, current scientific software developer education does not necessarily cover these elements [@doi:10.1109/CSEET.2009.44].

- Cost-Benefit of adoption

Working in teams is not an option, but a must for large projects.
Although it is not necessary in smaller projects, the benefits are significant.
- over time a small project might be taken over by another person, thus accidentally becoming a sort of team project with (by definition) insufficient communication
- lack of standards and good practices undermine quality and maintainability
- ease of technical knowledge transfer (which requires time and social factors) [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}]
- knowledge on who knows what (transactive memory system) speeds up problem solving [@doi:10.1177/1046496420967764]

However, it is not trivial to assemble a well functioning team.
Authors found that the overall performance increases when team members are familiar with each other and build problem-solving routines together through cumulative experience [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}].
Miriam Posner also points out that team management practices do not protect from a toxic environment [@{https://logicmag.io/clouds/agile-and-the-long-crisis-of-software/}].
