## Discussion ##


The lack of funding for the maintenance of software, particularly scientific software, prevents achieving a level of software quality that would inspire confidence in the results.
Funding is typically provided for the development of novel software, and it can be hard to justify spending time on maintenance which provides no output in terms of articles.
Currently, as Alexander Szalay puts it "The funding stops when they (researchers) actually develop the software prototype" [@doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01901-x].
This is a problem, because future researchers would want to build on each other's findings, use previous software as tools, and spend less time adopting or maintaining software [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412; @doi:10.1016/j.jss.2020.110848; @doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.8].
We believe the infrastructure would benefit from funding earmarked for maintenance, and from dedicating time to it in project proposals.

The next, almost natural, question related to better maintenance of scientific software in academia is funding.
It is notoriously hard to attract funding for existing scientific software, which contributes to the poor maintenance status of much of scientific software [@doi:10.1109/MIC.2014.88].
Fortunately in recent years, the lack of funding is being recognized and addressed by a few agencies, such as the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Essential Open Source Software for Science fund [@{https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/}].
These initiatives are great examples of how our views towards scientific software should be updated.
Scientific community and funding agencies should welcome the efforts of maintaining original software and encourage its updates instead of development of new software that risks remaining unmaintained.


## Optional section that might be put in discussion instead.
- Comparison to current academic coding
    - agile would be more stringent
    - agile would challenge the one project : one developer configuration
    - agile would highlight the impossibility to capitalise dividends of long-term building of knowlegebase and team chemistry
    - agile would point at the training gap

- Approaches and circumstances promoting the benefits of agile

- Cost-Benefit of adoption

Working in teams is not an option, but a must for large projects.
Although it is not necessary in smaller projects, the benefits are significant.
- over time a small project might be taken over by another person, thus accidentally becoming a sort of team project with (by definition) insufficient communication
- lack of standards and good practices undermine quality and maintainability
- ease of technical knowledge transfer (which requires time and social factors) [@{http://www.jstor.org/stable/40539129}]
- knowledge on who knows what (transactive memory system) speeds up problem solving [@doi:10.1177/1046496420967764]