### Review of team management litterature in the context of software engineering
- Programing as a collective practice is a key notion in software engineering, which prompted a corresponding rich litterature examining how to effectively organise it. A central theme in this litterature is the injonction to maximise team cohesion while minimising code coupling. They argue that the viability of the successive phases of a software development project is largely determined by the adoption of sound software design enforcing modularity and extensibility coupled with team management practices centered around communication and collective governance.

- Before delving into more specific recommendations, let us first define the scope of what constitutes management. We understand management as the set of tasks ensuring the viability of a software project. These tasks revolve around planning, monitoring resources and tracking progression. Typically these functions would be taken up by a single individual referred to as the “manager” of a project. In the particular context of computational projects in academia, such a strict division of labour is rarely found with regards to software development. Often ,these aspects would be deliberated by the developer/s, eventually reaching a consensus on the desired way forward and acted upon.This sort of self-management, at times collective, is analogous to some of the prescriptions of the SCRUM method. 

- SCRUM is a framework to perform these management tasks through team self-management. SCRUM was introduced as part of the broader family of agile methods, which expressed the aspiration for more autonomy and responsivity from software developers. This proposition was a reaction to the typical top-down management for engineering projects which proved inadequate in the context of software development. (source -> long crisis of agile)

- Approaches and circumstances promoting the benefits of agile

- Cost-Benefit of adoption